1. Abstract: 
 
Accurate traffic volume prediction is important for traffic management and city planning. In this project, Apache Spark 
MLlib was used to build scalable machine learning models to predict traffic volume using historical traffic data, 
time-based features, weather data, and lag features. Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) showed that time-based features 
such as hour of day and day of week affect traffic volume more than weather features. 
Two regression models, Random Forest and Gradient-Boosted Trees (GBT), were developed using Spark ML pipelines. 
Model performance was measured using RMSE and R². The initial GBT model performed better than Random Forest 
with lower error and higher accuracy. To improve results, hyperparameter tuning was applied to the GBT model using 
5-fold cross-validation in Spark. 
Lag features, including traffic volume from the previous hour and the same hour on the previous day, were added to the 
tuned GBT model to capture real traffic patterns. The tuned GBT with lag features achieved the best performance with 
an RMSE of 291.4 and an R² of 0.978, showing very high prediction accuracy, especially during peak traffic hours. 
Feature importance analysis confirmed that lag and time-based features were the most important predictors. 
2. Introduction: 
 
Traffic congestion is a major issue in cities, leading to delays, higher fuel use, and more pollution. By studying traffic 
patterns and predicting traffic volume, planners can manage roads more effectively. 
This project uses the Metro Interstate Traffic Volume dataset from the UCI Machine Learning Repository, which 
includes hourly traffic, weather, and holiday data. The goal is to clean and prepare the data and use machine learning to 
predict traffic volume, showing how data analytics can help solve real-world transportation problems. 
2.1 Data Source and Scope:  
 
The dataset used in this project comes from the UCI Machine Learning Repository, specifically the Metro Interstate 
Traffic Volume dataset. It contains 48,204 hourly records of traffic volume on westbound Interstate 94 near Minneapolis 
Saint Paul, Minnesota, collected from 2012 to 2018. Each row represents a single hour of traffic observation, with 
associated weather and temporal information. 
 
The dataset includes: 
● Temporal features: date_time (timestamp), hour of day, day of week, month 
● Traffic-related feature: traffic_volume (target variable: number of vehicles per hour) 
● Weather features: temp (temperature), rain_1h, snow_1h, clouds_all, weather_main, weather_description 
● Holiday indicator: holiday (US national and regional holidays, including Minnesota State Fair) 
The dataset provides a comprehensive view of traffic patterns over multiple years, capturing both typical 
weekday/weekend behavior and seasonal variations. 
This project focuses on analyzing the relationships between time, weather conditions, and holidays with traffic 
volume. Using big data techniques and Apache Spark MLlib, the goal is to build predictive models for traffic volume and 
gain insights into the key factors that influence traffic flow. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                
1 
Traffic Volume Prediction Using Machine Learning with Apache Spark 
Reshma Vangala | Big Data Management Systems & Tools | January 14 2026 
 
 
 
3. Data Acquisition and Cleaning/Preprocessing :  
3.1 Data Acquisition and Initial Load :  
The dataset used in this project was obtained from the UCI Machine Learning Repository, specifically the Metro 
Interstate Traffic Volume dataset. For the analysis, Apache Spark was used in a Databricks environment to handle 
large-scale data efficiently. 
The dataset was loaded into a Spark DataFrame from the Databricks default database using the following command: 
df = spark.table("default.metro_interstate_traffic_volume") 
display(df.limit(10)) 
The display() function shows the first 10 rows, and loading the data into a Spark DataFrame enables efficient processing 
and analysis. 
3.2 Data Cleaning and Preprocessing: 
Before analysis and modeling, the dataset was cleaned and preprocessed to ensure data quality and suitability for 
machine learning tasks. The following steps were performed: 
Step 1: Check for Missing Values 
● The dataset was examined for missing values, and none were found. 
Step 2: Check Schema 
● The date_time column was verified as a timestamp type (nullable = true), suitable for extracting temporal 
features. 
Step 3:Feature Extraction from date_time 
● Additional features were created to capture temporal patterns: 
from pyspark.sql.functions import hour, dayofweek, month 
df = df.withColumn("hour", hour("date_time")) 
df = df.withColumn("day_of_week", dayofweek("date_time")) 
df = df.withColumn("month", month("date_time")) 
Step 4:Create Holiday Indicator 
● A new column is_holiday was created: 
from pyspark.sql.functions import when, col 
df = df.withColumn("is_holiday", when(col("holiday") != "None", 1).otherwise(0)) 
● This column has a value of 1 if the day is a holiday, and 0 otherwise. 
Step 5: Categorical Feature Handling 
● The weather_description column was dropped as it was redundant. 
● The weather_main column was mapped to numeric indices for modeling. The mapping assigned Clouds = 1, 
Clear = 2, Rain = 3, Drizzle = 4, Mist = 5, Haze = 6, Fog = 7, Thunderstorm = 8, Snow = 9, Squall = 10, and 
Smoke = 11. This encoding allows the categorical weather data to be used directly in machine learning models. 
These preprocessing steps ensure that all features are in a suitable format for building machine learning models using 
Spark MLlib, capturing both temporal and environmental influences on traffic volume.  
 
4. Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) 
 
4.1 Feature Selection 
                                                                                                                                                                
2 
Traffic Volume Prediction Using Machine Learning with Apache Spark 
Reshma Vangala | Big Data Management Systems & Tools | January 14 2026 
 
 
 
● Target: traffic_volume 
● Features: is_holiday, weather_index, temp, rain_1h, snow_1h, clouds_all, hour, day_of_week, month 
 
4.1 Distribution of Traffic Volume 
The distribution of traffic volume was analyzed using Spark’s approxQuantile method. The estimated quartiles are Q1 = 
1,159, Median = 3,341, and Q3 = 4,928, showing a wide range of traffic conditions. 
 
● The distribution is bimodal, showing two main traffic patterns. 
● A sharp peak at low volumes (0–1,000 vehicles) represents frequent low-traffic periods, likely late night or early 
morning. 
● A broader peak between 4,000 and 5,500 vehicles represents regular high-traffic or commute hours. 
● Traffic volume decreases after 6,000 vehicles, meaning extremely heavy traffic is less common. 
● Overall, the data covers a wide range from very light to very heavy traffic conditions. 
● Traffic volume was grouped into four quartile-based bins: Low, Medium, High, and Very High. 
● Each bin has a similar number of records, showing the dataset is balanced and suitable for prediction modeling. 
4.2 Time-Based Traffic Patterns 
4.2.1 Average traffic per hour 
 
                                                                                                                                                                
3 
Traffic Volume Prediction Using Machine Learning with Apache Spark 
Reshma Vangala | Big Data Management Systems & Tools | January 14 2026 
 
 
 
Traffic volume shows clear patterns based on time. By hour of day, traffic is lowest during late-night and early-morning 
hours (midnight to 4 AM) and increases sharply after 5 AM. Peak traffic occurs between 3 PM and 6 PM, corresponding 
to evening commuting hours, before gradually declining at night. 
 
4.2.2 Average traffic per day of week and per month 
 
  
dayofweek() function returns values from 1 (Sunday) to 7 (Saturday).Traffic volume varies by day of the week, with 
lower levels on weekends and higher volumes on weekdays, especially from Monday to Friday, indicating typical 
commuting behavior. 
 
Average traffic per month 
 
Monthly analysis shows moderate seasonal variation. Traffic volume is slightly higher during late spring and summer 
months (May to October) and lower during winter months, likely due to weather conditions and seasonal travel 
behavior. 
These patterns confirm that hour, day of week, and month are important features for traffic volume prediction. 
 
4.2.3 Correlation Analysis 
 
                                                                                                                                                                
4 
Traffic Volume Prediction Using Machine Learning with Apache Spark 
Reshma Vangala | Big Data Management Systems & Tools | January 14 2026 
 
 
 
The hour of day shows the strongest correlation with traffic volume, confirming that traffic is highly time-dependent. 
Temperature has a positive relationship, while weather factors such as rain, snow, and cloud coverage have little to no 
impact. Day of week has a small effect, whereas month shows almost no correlation. Holidays slightly reduce traffic 
volume. Overall, time-based features are the most important predictors of traffic volume. 
5. Model Development and Predictive Modeling 
Following the exploratory data analysis, the next phase of this project focuses on developing predictive models to 
estimate traffic volume. Based on the patterns and insights observed during EDA, relevant temporal and weather-related 
features were selected. Machine learning techniques were then applied using Apache Spark MLlib to train, test, and 
evaluate regression models for accurate traffic prediction. 
5.1 Model Building Steps 
1. Data Splitting: The dataset was divided into training and testing sets to ensure unbiased model evaluation. 
2. Label and Feature Selection: traffic_volume was selected as the target variable, and relevant temporal and 
weather features were used as predictors. 
3. Vector Assembler: All feature columns were combined into a single feature vector required for Spark ML 
models. 
4. Model Selection: Two regression models were implemented: Random Forest Regressor and 
Gradient-Boosted Trees (GBT) Regressor. 
             5.1.1 Model Justification and Description 
Why These Models Were Used: 
Traffic volume data contains complex and non-linear patterns influenced by time, weather, and past traffic 
behavior. Tree-based ensemble models such as Random Forest and Gradient-Boosted Trees were selected 
because they can effectively capture these non-linear relationships, scale well with large datasets, and are well 
supported in Apache Spark MLlib. 
Random Forest Regressor: 
Random Forest builds multiple decision trees using different subsets of data and averages their predictions. This 
improves stability and reduces overfitting, making it a strong baseline model for traffic prediction. 
Gradient-Boosted Trees (GBT) Regressor: 
GBT builds trees sequentially, where each tree corrects errors made by previous trees. This allows the model to 
focus on difficult patterns and achieve higher accuracy, especially for time-dependent traffic data. 
5. Pipeline Construction: Pipelines were created to streamline feature assembly and model training. 
6. Model Training: Both models were trained using the training dataset. 
7. Prediction: The trained models generated traffic volume predictions on the test dataset. 
8. Model Evaluation: Model performance was assessed using RMSE and R² metrics. 
5.2 Evaluation Metrics Explanation: 
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) measures the average difference between predicted and actual traffic volumes. 
Lower RMSE values indicate better prediction accuracy. 
 
R² (Coefficient of Determination) represents how well the model explains the variability in traffic volume. Values closer 
to 1 indicate stronger predictive performance. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                
5 
Traffic Volume Prediction Using Machine Learning with Apache Spark 
Reshma Vangala | Big Data Management Systems & Tools | January 14 2026 
 
 
 
Model RMSE R2 
Random Forest 600.90 0.91 
Gradient-Boosted Tress 461.69 0.95 
The Gradient-Boosted Trees (GBT) model outperformed the Random Forest model, achieving a lower RMSE and a 
higher R² score. This demonstrates that GBT is better at capturing complex, non-linear traffic patterns, making it the 
preferred model for predicting traffic volume. 
 
5.3 Feature Importance - RF vs GBT 
The importance of each feature was analyzed to identify the most influential variables for predicting traffic volume. Both 
models highlight temporal features as the primary drivers: 
  
Random Forest (RF) Feature Importance: 
● Hour: 0.867 – the most critical factor, reflecting daily traffic patterns. 
● Day of Week: 0.085 – captures differences between weekdays and weekends. 
● Temperature: 0.024 – minor effect. 
● Other features (clouds, weather index, month, rain, holiday, snow) have very low importance. 
 
Gradient-Boosted Trees (GBT) Feature Importance: 
● Hour: 0.756 – again the dominant feature. 
● Day of Week: 0.146 – second most important. 
● Temperature: 0.043, Month: 0.029 – moderate influence. 
● Weather and holiday indicators show minimal impact. 
Key Insight: 
Both models confirm that hour and day of week are the most important predictors of traffic volume, while weather 
and holiday-related features have a smaller role. 
 
 
5.4 Actual vs Predicted Analysis - RF vs GBT 
                                                                                                                                                                
6 
Traffic Volume Prediction Using Machine Learning with Apache Spark 
Reshma Vangala | Big Data Management Systems & Tools | January 14 2026 
 
 
 
  
Random Forest (RF): 
 RF captures the overall trend but flattens at high traffic levels, showing difficulty in predicting very large values. It also 
has wider spread at low traffic, meaning less precise predictions. 
Gradient Boosted Trees (GBT): 
 GBT follows the diagonal more closely, with better accuracy at low and medium traffic. It still slightly under-predicts at 
high traffic, but is more consistent than RF. 
Key Insight: 
 GBT outperforms RF with tighter alignment to actual values, especially at medium and high traffic levels, making it the 
more reliable model. 
5.5 Residual Analysis - Random Forest vs GBT 
  
Residual Analysis - A residual plot shows the difference between the actual and predicted traffic volumes, helping to 
evaluate model accuracy and stability. 
 
Random Forest Residual Plot: 
Residuals increase with higher traffic volume, indicating reduced accuracy at high traffic levels. 
 
Gradient-Boosted Trees Residual Plot: 
Residuals show a more consistent spread compared to Random Forest, indicating better stability and prediction 
accuracy. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                
7 
Traffic Volume Prediction Using Machine Learning with Apache Spark 
Reshma Vangala | Big Data Management Systems & Tools | January 14 2026 
 
 
 
6. Optimized Gradient-Boosted Trees: Hyperparameter Tuning and Lag Feature Enhancement 
The original GBT struggled with high traffic volumes and often under-predicted peak values. After hyperparameter 
tuning, the model became more accurate and stable:  the RMSE was reduced, but the R² value remained nearly the 
same, but still had difficulty with extreme traffic levels. 
Adding lag features allowed the tuned GBT to use recent and past traffic patterns, helping it capture time-based trends 
more effectively. As a result, the Tuned GBT with lag features achieved the best performance, with the lowest RMSE 
(291.41) and highest R² (0.978), making it the most accurate model for traffic prediction. 
Model RMSE R2 
Tuned GBT 419.5 0.95 
Tuned GBT with lag feature 291.41 0.978 
 
6.1  Impact of Lag Features 
Lag features let the model incorporate recent and past traffic, which is critical because traffic volume follows short-term 
trends and daily repetition. 
Actual vs Predicted Scatter Plot 
  
6.2 Accuracy and Stability 
Hyperparameter tuning mainly improves the RMSE, meaning the average prediction error is reduced, but the overall 
accuracy pattern remains similar to the base GBT. The model behavior at high traffic levels does not change much and it 
still slightly under-predicts extreme values. 
After adding lag features, the Tuned GBT + Lag model shows visibly tighter alignment with the diagonal, indicating real 
improvement in accuracy, not just error magnitude. Predictions become more consistent across all traffic levels, 
especially during peak periods. 
Key Insight: 
 Tuning helps reduce error (better RMSE), but lag features drive the real accuracy improvement by capturing temporal 
patterns, leading to more reliable predictions, particularly at high traffic volumes. 
                                                                                                                                                                
8 
Traffic Volume Prediction Using Machine Learning with Apache Spark 
Reshma Vangala | Big Data Management Systems & Tools | January 14 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
6.3 Feature Importance 
● The most important feature is traffic_lag_1h, showing that recent traffic strongly predicts current traffic. 
● Hour of day is the second most important feature, confirming strong daily traffic patterns. 
● Day of week also contributes, showing differences between weekdays and weekends. 
● Weather-related features (temperature, rain_1h, snow_1h, clouds_all, weather_index) have very low importance, 
meaning they have little impact on traffic in this model. 
● Holiday and month have minimal influence compared to time-based and lag features. 
● Overall, traffic is mainly driven by recent past traffic and time patterns, not by short-term weather conditions. 
 
Observation 
While hyperparameter tuning improved the GBT, adding lag features gave the largest performance boost, making the 
tuned GBT with lag features the best model for accurate and reliable traffic volume prediction. 
6.4 Future Traffic Prediction Using Tuned GBT with Lag Features 
To validate the practical applicability of the proposed model, the tuned Gradient-Boosted Trees model with lag features 
was applied to simulated future data. The input included projected hour, day_of_week and historical traffic lag values. 
The model successfully generated future traffic volume predictions, confirming its suitability for deployment in real-time 
traffic monitoring systems. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                
9 
Traffic Volume Prediction Using Machine Learning with Apache Spark 
Reshma Vangala | Big Data Management Systems & Tools | January 14 2026 
 
 
 
 
7. Final Conclusion 
 
 
 
This project focused on predicting traffic volume using machine learning models implemented in Apache Spark MLlib. 
Exploratory data analysis revealed strong temporal patterns in traffic behavior, with hour of day and day of week 
emerging as the most influential features, while weather variables showed a relatively weaker impact. 
Based on these insights, Random Forest and Gradient-Boosted Trees (GBT) models were developed and evaluated 
using RMSE and R² metrics. The initial GBT model outperformed Random Forest, demonstrating a stronger ability to 
capture complex, non-linear relationships in traffic data. Further improvements were achieved through hyperparameter 
tuning using 5-fold cross-validation, resulting in a tuned GBT model with an RMSE of 419.51 and an R² of 0.95. 
Actual-vs-predicted and residual analyses confirmed improved prediction stability, particularly during high traffic periods. 
To further enhance performance, lag features representing traffic volume from the previous hour and the same hour on 
the previous day were incorporated into the tuned GBT model. These features enabled the model to capture short-term 
trends and daily traffic repetition more effectively. The tuned GBT with lag features achieved a significantly improved 
RMSE of 291.41 and an R² of 0.978, indicating excellent predictive accuracy. Feature importance analysis confirmed 
that lag variables were among the most influential predictors. 
Overall, the Tuned Gradient-Boosted Trees model with lag features proved to be the most effective approach for traffic 
volume prediction, combining strong temporal modeling capability with high accuracy. This makes it well suited for 
real-world traffic forecasting and transportation planning applications. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                
10 
Traffic Volume Prediction Using Machine Learning with Apache Spark 
Reshma Vangala | Big Data Management Systems & Tools | January 14 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
                                                                                                                                                                
