1. Abstract 
This project predicts online shopper purchasing behavior using the Online Shoppers Purchasing Intention 
Dataset from UCI, which contains 12,330 user sessions with behavioral, temporal, and technical features. 
After cleaning and preprocessing, EDA showed strong class imbalance, high skewness in behavioral 
features, and strong links between purchases and PageValues, BounceRates, ExitRates, and product 
interactions. Statistical tests confirmed that weekend visits and user engagement significantly affect 
purchases. SMOTE was used to handle imbalance. Logistic Regression, Random Forest, and Gradient 
Boosting were trained, with Gradient Boosting performing best (89% accuracy, AUC 0.93). Feature 
importance showed PageValues as the strongest predictor, proving that user behavior is more important than 
technical factors in predicting purchases. 
2. Introduction 
This project focuses on analyzing and predicting online shopper purchasing behavior using machine 
learning techniques. Understanding user behavior during online sessions helps e-commerce businesses 
improve customer experience, optimize marketing strategies, and increase conversion rates. The analysis 
uses a real-world dataset that captures detailed user interaction metrics collected during website visits. 
3. Data Source and Scope 
The online shopper’s dataset used in this project originates from an open data repository containing 
behavioral metrics from an e-commerce platform. The data quality was generally high with no major missing 
values, but several features required transformation for effective modeling. Categorical variables such as 
Month, Visitor Type, and Weekend indicators were converted using encoding techniques. Numerical fields 
including durations and rates were analyzed for skewness and scaled appropriately. 
The dataset contains 12,330 records and 18 attributes. Each record represents a single online user session, 
capturing browsing behavior, session characteristics, and contextual information. The Revenue attribute is 
used as the target variable, indicating whether a user made a purchase during their online session. 
● The dataset includes features representing the number of administrative, informational, and 
product-related pages visited, along with the time spent on each of these page types. 
● Behavioral metrics such as BounceRates and ExitRates describe how quickly users leave the website 
and how frequently they exit from specific pages. 
● PageValues represents the estimated value of the pages visited. 
● SpecialDay, Month, OperatingSystems, Browser, Region, TrafficType, VisitorType, and Weekend 
capture temporal, technical, and user-related factors that influence purchasing behavior. 
Overall, the dataset provides a comprehensive view of online customer interactions and is well-suited for user 
behavior analysis and machine learning classification models to predict purchasing intention. 
Online Shopper Purchase Intent Analysis Using Machine Learning 
Virendra Rajpurohit, Reshma Vangala | Machine Learning | January 15 2026 
4. Data Acquisition and Cleaning/Preprocessing:  
4.1 Data Acquisition and Initial Load:  
The dataset was loaded into a Pandas DataFrame using the read_csv() 
4.2 Data Cleaning 
● The dataset contained no missing values, so no imputation was required. 
● Categorical features were converted into numerical format, suitable for machine learning models. 
● Binary variables like Weekend and Revenue were encoded as:  
○ False - 0, True - 1 
● The VisitorType feature was encoded as: 
○ Returning_Visitor - 0 
○ New_Visitor - 1 
○ Other - 2 
● The Month feature was numerically encoded based on calendar order as follows: Feb = 2, Mar = 3, 
May = 5, June = 6, Jul = 7, Aug = 8, Sep = 9, Oct = 10, Nov = 11, and Dec = 12. 
These cleaning steps ensured the dataset was consistent, machine-readable, and ready for preprocessing 
and model training. 
5. Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) 
Analysis of browsing behavior through histograms and correlation matrices revealed that PageValues is by far 
the strongest predictor of Revenue. Sessions with high PageValues and long ProductRelated_Duration exhibit 
significantly higher purchase probability. ExitRates and BounceRates show negative correlation with 
Revenue, confirming that users leaving quickly are unlikely to convert. Weekend traffic tends to be slightly 
lower in conversion compared with weekday sessions. 
5.1 Feature Selection 
● Target: Revenue (Binary variable indicating whether a purchase was made) 
● Features: 
Administrative, 
Administrative_Duration, 
Informational, 
Informational_Duration, 
ProductRelated, ProductRelated_Duration, BounceRates, ExitRates, PageValues, SpecialDay, Month, 
OperatingSystems, Browser, Region, TrafficType, VisitorType, Weekend. 
5.2 Handling Data Imbalance 
To address this imbalance, SMOTE (Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique) was applied. SMOTE 
generates synthetic samples for the minority class (Revenue = 1), helping to balance the dataset. This 
improves model learning, reduces bias toward the majority class, and enhances the performance of 
classification models. 
Online Shopper Purchase Intent Analysis Using Machine Learning 
Virendra Rajpurohit, Reshma Vangala | Machine Learning | January 15 2026 
5.3 Target Variable Distribution 
 
Observation 
● The majority of users (84.53%) did not make 
a purchase. 
● Only 15.47% of users completed a purchase. 
● This indicates a class imbalance, where the 
number of non-purchase cases is significantly 
higher than purchase cases. 
 
5.4 Distribution of Product-Related Page Visits 
 
Observation:  
● Most users visited very few product-related 
pages, indicating strong concentration near 0. 
● The distribution is highly right-skewed, with a 
long tail extending up to around 700 pages. 
● A small fraction of users visited a very large 
number of product-related pages. 
● High variability in product page interactions 
could influence purchase behavior and 
conversion likelihood. 
5.5 Distribution of Page Values 
 
Observation: 
● Most users have very low page values, 
concentrated near 0. 
● The distribution is highly right-skewed, with a 
long tail extending up to around 350. 
● A small number of users have very high page 
values, which could indicate high engagement 
or high likelihood of purchase. 
● PageValues captures monetary intent, users 
with PageValues > 5 are very likely buyers. 
Online Shopper Purchase Intent Analysis Using Machine Learning 
Virendra Rajpurohit, Reshma Vangala | Machine Learning | January 15 2026 
5.6 Bounce Rate Analysis by Purchase Behavior 
 
Observation: 
● Revenue = 0 (No Purchase): Mean bounce 
rate 0.025; most sessions 0–0.02 with outliers 
up to 0.20. 
● Revenue = 1 (Purchase Made): Mean bounce 
rate 0.005; sessions tightly clustered near 0. 
● Insight: Non-buyers leave faster, while buyers 
stay longer; lower bounce rates strongly 
correlate with purchases. 
● Exit rate shows the same pattern. 
 
5.7 Product Interactions vs. Revenue 
 
Observation: 
● Buyers view more products (median ~25–30) 
than non-buyers (median ~10–15). 
● Most users interact with only a few products. 
● A few users browse a lot but don’t purchase. 
● Higher product interaction generally increases 
the chance of buying. 
 
 
5.8 PageValues vs. Revenue 
 
Observation 
● Purchasers have significantly higher 
PageValues than non-purchasers. 
● Most non-buyers show PageValues near zero. 
● Higher PageValues strongly increase 
purchase likelihood. 
● PageValues is a key predictor of conversion. 
 
Online Shopper Purchase Intent Analysis Using Machine Learning 
Virendra Rajpurohit, Reshma Vangala | Machine Learning | January 15 2026 
5.9 Correlation Heatmap:  
Strong Predictors of Revenue: 
Positive correlation: 
● PageValues (0.49): When users visit more pages like checkout, they are much more likely to buy. 
● ProductRelated (0.16): Viewing more product pages slightly increases the chance of purchase. 
● Informational (0.15): Information pages can slightly increase purchase likelihood, but the effect is small. 
Negative correlation: 
● ExitRates (-0.21): Users who leave pages quickly are less likely to buy. 
● BounceRates (-0.15): If users leave after viewing only one page, the chance of purchase is lower. 
Other Key Observations (Multicollinearity): Below features are very strongly related. 
● BounceRates & ExitRates (0.91) 
● ProductRelated & ProductRelated_Duration (0.86) 
Online Shopper Purchase Intent Analysis Using Machine Learning 
Virendra Rajpurohit, Reshma Vangala | Machine Learning | January 15 2026 
6. Hypothesis Test 
6.1 Chi-Square Test: Weekend vs Revenue 
A Chi-square test of independence was conducted to examine the relationship between weekday vs weekend 
and Revenue (purchase vs no purchase). 
Hypotheses: 
● H₀ (Null Hypothesis): Weekend does not affect the likelihood of making a purchase. 
● H₁ (Alternative Hypothesis): Users are more likely to make a purchase on weekends. 
Contingency Table: 
 No Purchase (0) Purchase (1) 
Weekday (0) 8053 1409 
Weekend (1) 2369 499 
Test Results: Since the p-value is less than 0.05, the null hypothesis is rejected. 
● Chi-square statistic: 10.391 
● p-value: 0.001 
Conclusion: There is a statistically significant association between weekend visits and purchase behavior. 
6.2 T-Test: Bounce Rate vs Purchase Behavior 
An independent two-sample t-test was conducted to examine whether there is a significant difference in 
bounce rates between users who made a purchase and those who did not. 
Hypotheses: 
● H₀ (Null Hypothesis): There is no difference in bounce rates between buyers and non-buyers. 
● H₁ (Alternative Hypothesis): Bounce rates differ between buyers and non-buyers. 
 
Test Results: 
● T-statistic: −34.85 
● Degrees of freedom: 11,795.09 
● Critical t-value (α = 0.05): −1.645 
● P-value: 1.29 × 10⁻²⁵³ 
p-value is effectively zero, so reject the null 
hypothesis. 
Conclusion: There is a statistically significant 
difference in bounce rates between buyers and 
non-buyers. The negative t-statistic indicates that less 
bounce rate implies more purchase likelihood. 
Online Shopper Purchase Intent Analysis Using Machine Learning 
Virendra Rajpurohit, Reshma Vangala | Machine Learning | January 15 2026 
7. Model Building 
7.1 Data Preparation for Modeling 
Before training the machine learning models, the dataset was preprocessed to ensure that all features were in 
a suitable format and scale for modeling. 
● Numerical features were standardized using StandardScaler to normalize their ranges and prevent 
features with larger magnitudes from dominating the model. 
● Categorical features were encoded using OneHotEncoder with handle_unknown='ignore' to safely 
manage unseen categories in the test data. 
The dataset was then split into training and testing sets using an 80:20 ratio, ensuring that the class 
distribution of the target variable (Revenue) was preserved through stratified sampling. 
● Training set shape: (9,864, 17) 
● Test set shape: (2,466, 17) 
 
7.2 Logistic Regression Model 
Model Description 
A Logistic Regression model was implemented as a baseline classification algorithm to predict user purchase 
behavior (Revenue). To ensure proper feature scaling and stable convergence, the model was built using a 
pipeline that integrates StandardScaler with Logistic Regression. The maximum number of iterations was 
increased to 2000 to avoid convergence issues. The model was trained on the SMOTE-balanced training 
dataset to address class imbalance and improve the detection of purchasing sessions. 
Model Evaluation 
The model was evaluated on the unseen test dataset using classification metrics and ROC-AUC score. 
ROC-AUC stands for Receiver Operating Characteristic Area Under the Curve. 
Classification Results: Accuracy: 85% , ROC-AUC: 0.856. 
Class Precision Recall F1-Score 
0 (No Purchase) 0.94 0.88 0.91 
1 (Purchase) 0.52 0.69 0.59 
Confusion Matrix Interpretation 
● True Negatives (1,842): Non-buyers correctly predicted. 
● True Positives (264): Buyers correctly predicted. 
● False Positives (242): Non-buyers incorrectly classified as buyers. 
● False Negatives (118): Buyers incorrectly classified as non-buyers. 
Online Shopper Purchase Intent Analysis Using Machine Learning 
Virendra Rajpurohit, Reshma Vangala | Machine Learning | January 15 2026 
 
Precision: Out of all the sessions the model 
predicted as buyers, how many were actual. 
Recall: Out of all the actual buyers, recall tells us 
how many the model was correctly found. 
F1-Score: A single score that balances both above. 
Observation 
The model performs well in distinguishing between 
buyers and non-buyers, with an AUC of 0.86. It is 
particularly strong at identifying non-buyers and 
achieves a recall of 0.69 for buyers, meaning most 
purchasing sessions are correctly detected. 
7.3 Random Forest Model 
Model Description: 
A Random Forest classifier was built using 200 decision trees with a maximum depth of 10. The model was 
trained on SMOTE-balanced training data to handle class imbalance between buyers (1) and non-buyers (0). 
Random state was fixed to ensure reproducible results. Random Forest combines multiple decision trees to 
improve prediction accuracy and reduce overfitting. 
Model Evaluation: Accuracy: 0.88, ROC–AUC: 0.92 
 
● The model shows strong overall performance. 
High ROC–AUC indicates excellent ability to 
separate buyers from non-buyers. Accuracy 
of 88% means most predictions are correct 
even with imbalanced data. 
● The model is very strong at identifying 
non-buyers. 
● For buyers, recall is high (0.76), meaning 
most actual buyers are detected. 
● Precision for buyers is moderate (0.59), 
meaning some predicted buyers are actually 
non-buyers. 
● This trade-off is acceptable when the goal is 
to not miss potential buyers. 
Observation: The model successfully captures most buyers while keeping false alarms at a reasonable level. 
It slightly favors identifying buyers, which is useful for business tasks like marketing or customer targeting 
where missing a buyer is costlier than contacting a non-buyer. 
Online Shopper Purchase Intent Analysis Using Machine Learning 
Virendra Rajpurohit, Reshma Vangala | Machine Learning | January 15 2026 
Classification Report: 
Class Precision Recall F1-Score 
0 (No Purchase) 0.95 0.90 0.93 
1 (Purchase) 0.59 0.76 0.67 
7.4 Gradient Boosting Tree Model 
Model Description 
A Gradient Boosting Classifier was trained using 150 boosting stages, a learning rate of 0.1, and tree depth of 
3. The model was trained on SMOTE-balanced training data to handle class imbalance and evaluated on the 
original test set. 
Model Evaluation: Accuracy: 0.89, ROC–AUC: 0.93 
Classification Report: 
Class Precision Recall F1-Score Support 
0 (No Purchase) 0.95 0.92 0.93 2084 
1 (Purchase) 0.61 0.73 0.67 382 
 
 
● The model shows strong overall performance, 
with slightly better results than Random 
Forest. The high ROC–AUC indicates 
excellent ability to distinguish between buyers 
and non-buyers. 
● The model performs very well for non-buyers. 
● For buyers, recall is 0.73, meaning most 
buyers are correctly identified. 
● Precision for buyers is 0.61, slightly better 
than Random Forest. 
● This balance is useful when identifying likely 
purchasers. 
 
Observation: Gradient Boosting shows strong and balanced performance, slightly outperforming Random 
Forest in overall accuracy and precision for buyers, making it a good choice for purchase prediction tasks. 
Online Shopper Purchase Intent Analysis Using Machine Learning 
Virendra Rajpurohit, Reshma Vangala | Machine Learning | January 15 2026 
PageValues is by far the most important feature in Gradient Boosting, dominating the model’s decisions. 
Month has some influence, while all other features contribute very little. This shows the model mainly relies on 
page value and, to a smaller extent, seasonal effects to predict purchases. 
8. Conclusion 
This study successfully demonstrated how machine learning can be used to predict online shopper 
purchasing intention using real-world session data. Exploratory analysis showed that most users do not 
purchase, making class imbalance a major challenge, which was effectively handled using SMOTE. 
Behavioral features such as PageValues, product interactions, bounce rate, and exit rate were found to be the 
strongest indicators of purchase behavior. Statistical tests confirmed that both user engagement and timing 
(weekend vs weekday) significantly influence conversions. 
Among the models tested, Gradient Boosting performed the best with 89% accuracy and an AUC of 0.93, 
slightly outperforming Random Forest and clearly improving over the baseline Logistic Regression model. 
Both tree-based models showed strong ability to detect buyers while maintaining high performance on 
non-buyers. Feature importance analysis revealed that PageValues dominates prediction, while technical 
attributes such as operating system or browser have minimal impact. 
Overall, the results show that user behavior during a session is far more important than technical or 
demographic factors in predicting purchases. These findings can help e-commerce businesses focus on 
Online Shopper Purchase Intent Analysis Using Machine Learning 
Virendra Rajpurohit, Reshma Vangala | Machine Learning | January 15 2026 
improving user engagement, optimizing high-value pages, and targeting users more effectively to increase 
conversion rates. 
9. Future Work 
The hypothesis that browsing behavior can accurately predict purchase intention has been validated. The 
project produced a useful model suitable for operational marketing deployment. Future improvements may 
include richer user-level history features, deeper calibration techniques, and online A/B testing integration. 
Additional ensemble approaches combining XGBoost and LightGBM probabilities may further enhance 
robustness.  - Enhance targeting for high-value visitor categories. - Optimize pages with high exit/bounce rates. 
10. Appendix – Data Sample 
● Dataset Link: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/468/online+shoppers+purchasing+intention+dataset 
● A small sample of the dataset is below: 
df=pd.read_csv('online_shoppers_intention.csv') 
df.head(2) 
● Features encoding and target, Code for model training, ROC curves, confusion matrices, and SHAP 
generation are fully documented in the Jupyter notebook.  
● ROC-AUC stands for Receiver Operating Characteristic Area Under the Curve.
