1. Abstract: 
This study investigates how lifestyle habits, eating behaviors, and physical conditions relate to 
obesity levels using the UCI Obesity Dataset. Statistical analysis, including t-tests, Chi-square 
tests, and ANOVA, identified significant differences across groups, such as higher average 
weights in males, greater weight among individuals with a family history of overweight, and 
strong impacts of snacking frequency on weight. A binary logistic regression model further 
revealed that BMI is the strongest predictors of obesity, while lifestyle factors such as water 
intake, exercise frequency, and meal patterns contribute smaller but meaningful effects. Overall, 
the findings show that physical measures are the primary determinants of obesity, with lifestyle 
behaviors providing supportive insights. This analysis emphasizes the value of data-driven 
approaches for improving obesity assessment and risk prediction. 
2. Introduction: 
Obesity is a growing global health concern linked to lifestyle habits, physical activity, and 
genetics. Understanding the factors that contribute to obesity is essential for prevention and 
early intervention. This project uses the “Estimation of Obesity Levels Based on Eating Habits 
and Physical Condition” dataset from the UCI Machine Learning Repository, which includes 
information on eating patterns, physical activity, and demographic factors of individuals from 
Mexico, Peru, and Colombia. The goal is to analyze the relationship between lifestyle behaviors 
and obesity levels and to develop predictive models that classify individuals’ obesity risk. The 
study highlights key factors influencing obesity and provides insights for data-driven health 
interventions. 
2.1 Data Source and Scope: 
The dataset used in this project comes from the UCI Machine Learning Repository, specifically 
the file ObesityDataSet_raw_and_data_sinthetic.csv (UCI Obesity Dataset). It contains 2,111 
records of individuals from Mexico, Peru, and Colombia, with 17 attributes covering 
demographics, eating habits, physical activity, and family history related to being overweight. 
The unit of analysis is an individual person, with each row representing a unique participant. 
The dataset includes: 
● Demographics: Gender, Age, Height, Weight, Family history of overweight. 
● Eating habits: HighCalFreq, VegMealFreq, MealsPerDay, Snacking, WaterIntake, 
TrackCalories. 
● Lifestyle habits: ExerciseFreq, ScreenTime, AlcoholFreq, SMOKE, TransportMode. 
● Target variable: ObesityLevel, classified into “Insufficient Weight,” “Normal Weight,” 
“Overweight Level I & II,” and “Obesity Type I–III.” 
Notably, 77% of the data was generated synthetically using the Weka tool and SMOTE 
filter, while 23% was collected directly from users through a web platform. This 
combination ensures a robust dataset for analysis while maintaining representation of real-world 
behavior. 
This project focuses on analyzing relationships between lifestyle habits and obesity using 
hypothesis testing and regression analysis, providing insights into key factors influencing 
obesity risk. 
1 
Obesity Analysis Using Lifestyle and Physical Condition Factors 
Rekha, Reshma Vangala, Kavya | Statistics for Data Science | November 2025  
3. Data Acquisition and Cleaning/Preprocessing : 
3.1 Data Acquisition and Initial Load : 
The dataset used in this project was obtained from the UCI Machine Learning Repository. 
Specifically, the file ObesityDataSet_raw_and_data_sinthetic.csv was downloaded in CSV 
format. 
For the analysis, Python libraries such as pandas, numpy, matplotlib, and seaborn were used. 
The dataset was loaded into a Pandas DataFrame directly from the GitHub repository: 
url = 
"https://raw.githubusercontent.com/RohitG57/Estimation-of-obesity-levels-based-on-eating-habits-and-physical-condition/main/ObesityDataSet_raw_and_data_sinthetic.csv" 
df= pd.read_csv(url) 
The dataset was loaded into a Pandas DataFrame for inspection and further analysis using 
pd.read_csv().  
3.2 Data Cleaning and Preprocessing:  
Step 1. Renaming Columns: The original dataset contained long and complex column names. 
To simplify analysis and avoid syntax issues in Python, the columns were renamed with shorter, 
standardized names. 
Step 2. Converting Columns to Appropriate Data Types: To optimize memory usage and 
improve performance, we converted certain columns to more suitable data types. 
● Categorical Conversion - Columns with repeated text values, such as Gender, Snacking, 
AlcoholFreq, TransportMode, ObesityLevel, were converted to the category data type. This 
reduces memory usage and improves performance when analyzing repeated text values.  
Step 3. Checking for missing value : The dataset was checked for missing or invalid values. 
No missing values were found, so no imputation or cleaning was necessary for this step. 
Step 4. Checking for Duplicate Records : The dataset was checked for duplicate rows, and a 
few duplicate observations were found. These duplicates were removed to ensure data 
accuracy and prevent repeated information from affecting the analysis. The final dataset 
contained 2,087 rows and 17 columns, ensuring cleaner and more reliable data for analysis. 
Step 5. Created New Features: BMI 
df['BMI'] = df['Weight'] / (df['Height']**2) 
4. Analysis 
2 
Obesity Analysis Using Lifestyle and Physical Condition Factors 
Rekha, Reshma Vangala, Kavya | Statistics for Data Science | November 2025  
4.1 Exploratory Analysis Using Boxplot 
Question :  Is there a significant difference in average weight between males and females? 
To examine how weight is distributed across genders, we first created a boxplot comparing 
Weight vs. Gender. 
● Higher Average Weight in Males: Males weigh more on average (90.8 kg) than 
females (82.3 kg), with a higher median as well. 
● More Variability in Females: Female weights are more spread out (std=29.7) compared 
to males (std=21.4). 
● Tighter Male Grouping: The middle 50% of male weights (IQR=33.5 kg) is more 
clustered than females (IQR=47.0 kg). 
● Outliers Present: There is one high-weight outlier among males (173 kg). 
4.1.1 T-Test: Weight vs Gender 
To determine if the difference in average weight between males and females is statistically 
significant, an independent two-sample t-test was performed. 
Results: 
● T-statistic: -7.53 
● P-value: 7.68 × 10⁻¹⁴ 
● Critical t-value (α = 0.05) ±1.96 
3 
Obesity Analysis Using Lifestyle and Physical Condition Factors 
Rekha, Reshma Vangala, Kavya | Statistics for Data Science | November 2025  
Interpretation: 
● The t-statistic falls far outside the acceptance range (|t| > t_critical), and the p-value is 
extremely small. 
● This indicates that the difference in mean weights between males and females is 
statistically significant. 
Conclusion: 
● Males have a significantly higher average weight than females. 
● The result supports the observation from the boxplot that weight distributions differ by 
gender. 
4.2 Chi-Square Test: Gender and Obesity Level 
Question : Is obesity level associated with gender in this dataset? 
Hypothesis 
H₀: Gender and Obesity Level are independent (no association). 
H₁: Gender and Obesity Level are not independent (significant association). 
A Chi-square test of independence was conducted to determine whether there is a significant 
relationship between Gender (Male, Female) and Obesity Level (7 categories). A contingency 
table was created to compare how obesity levels are distributed across genders. 
Interpretation: 
● The distribution of obesity levels differs between males and females. 
4 
Obesity Analysis Using Lifestyle and Physical Condition Factors 
Rekha, Reshma Vangala, Kavya | Statistics for Data Science | November 2025  
● For example: 
○ More males fall into                                                                        
Obesity_Type_II  (295 cases). 
○ More females fall into Obesity_Type_III  (323 cases). 
● This suggests that gender influences the pattern of obesity classification in this 
dataset. 
4.2.1 Chi-Square Test Procedure 
A Chi-square test was performed on the contingency table for Gender and Obesity Level to 
compare the observed counts with the expected counts and determine whether the two 
variables are related. 
Chi-Square Test Results: 
● Chi-square Statistic: 657.45 
● Degrees of Freedom: 6 
● P-value: 0.0000 
● Expected Counts: 
[[132.41 139.85 174.07 147.29 160.68 136.88 143.82] 
[134.59 142.15 176.93 149.71 163.32 139.12 146.18]] 
Conclusion:  
Since the p-value is 0.0000, there is a significant association between Gender and Obesity 
Level. This means obesity levels differ meaningfully between males and females. 
4.3 T-Test: Weight and Family History of Overweight 
Question : Does weight differ significantly between individuals with and without a family history        
of being overweight? 
Hypothesis: 
● Null Hypothesis (H₀): There is no difference in average weight between the two 
groups. 
● Alternative Hypothesis (H₁): There is a significant difference in average weight 
between the two groups. 
Method: An independent two-sample t-test (with unequal variances) was performed using 
weight data from: 
● Individuals with family history (“yes”) 
● Individuals without family history (“no”) 
A boxplot was also used to visually compare weight distributions. 
Results: 
● T-statistic: 35.8177 
● P-value: 1.4275 × 10⁻¹⁷³ 
Conclusion: 
5 
Obesity Analysis Using Lifestyle and Physical Condition Factors 
Rekha, Reshma Vangala, Kavya | Statistics for Data Science | November 2025  
● The p-value is extremely small, far below 0.05. Therefore, we reject the null hypothesis. 
● There is a highly significant difference in weight between people with and without a 
family history of being overweight. The boxplot supports this result, showing that 
individuals with a family history tend to have higher weights, on average. 
4.4 T-Test: Exercise Frequency vs Obesity Status 
Question : Do non-obese individuals exercise more frequently than obese individuals on 
average? 
● H₀ (Null): There is no difference in mean exercise frequency between obese and 
non-obese individuals.  
● H₁ (Alternative): Non-obese individuals have a higher mean exercise frequency than 
obese individuals. 
Method: 
An independent two-sample t-test (with unequal variances) was performed using Obesity data 
with Exercise Frequency: 
● Sample 1 : Individuals classified as Obese((Obesity_type_I, Obesity_type_II, 
Obesity_type III) 
● Sample 2 : Individuals classified as Non - Obese(Insufficient_Weight, Normal_weight, 
Overweight_I, Overweight_II)   
A boxplot & Histogram was also used to visually compare weight distributions. 
Results: 
● T-statistic: 7.05 
● P-value: approximately 0.00000000000246 
Conclusion: 
● As the p-value is zero. Therefore, we reject the null hypothesis. This indicates the 
exercise frequency affects the obesity level. So we can reject the Null hypothesis that 
exercise does not affect obesity. 
6 
Obesity Analysis Using Lifestyle and Physical Condition Factors 
Rekha, Reshma Vangala, Kavya | Statistics for Data Science | November 2025  
Boxplot: The median exercise frequency appears higher for the non obese group compared to 
the obese group. The spread of data looks somewhat similar but with the higher range of 
non-obese groups. 
Histogram/KDE(with density curves) :  
Non-obese(blue) : The distribution shows higher exercise frequencies are more common. 
Obese(red) : This distribution is skewed towards lower exercise frequencies. 
Overall the result suggests that there is a significant difference in exercise frequency between 
non-obese & obese groups. The non-obese group tends to have a higher exercise frequency 
compared to the obese group. 
4.5 ANOVA: Snacking vs Weight 
Question : To test whether the average weight differs among people with different snacking 
frequencies : Always, Frequently, Sometimes, and No. 
4.5.1 Descriptive Statistics - Snacking vs Weight 
Before running the ANOVA test, descriptive statistics were analyzed for each snacking group: 
● Sometimes: Highest average weight (91.4 kg) with the widest variation (std = 25). 
● Always: Moderate mean weight (71.1 kg). 
● No: Mean weight (68.5 kg) with the least variation (std = 12.8). 
● Frequently: Lowest mean weight (59.1 kg). 
These results suggest that individuals who snack sometimes tend to have higher and more 
varied weights than other groups, supporting further testing with ANOVA. 
4.5.2 ANOVA Test - Snacking vs Weight 
● Null Hypothesis (H₀): Mean weight is the same across all snacking groups. 
● Alternative Hypothesis (H₁): At least one group mean is different. 
Results: 
7 
Obesity Analysis Using Lifestyle and Physical Condition Factors 
Rekha, Reshma Vangala, Kavya | Statistics for Data Science | November 2025  
● F-statistic = 142.85 
● p-value = 3.58 × 10⁻⁸⁴ 
Conclusion:  
Since the p-value is far below 0.05, we reject the null hypothesis. 
This means weight differs significantly among people with different snacking habits. 
4.5.3 Post-hoc Analysis : Snacking vs Weight 
After finding a significant ANOVA result, a Bonferroni-corrected pairwise t-test was used to 
see which snacking groups differ in weight. 
Observation: 
● Significant weight differences were found between most pairs (p < 0.05). 
● No significant difference between “Always” and “No” snacking groups (p = 0.46). 
● The largest differences occurred between “Frequently” and “Sometimes” snackers. 
Conclusion: 
Snacking frequency has a strong impact on weight, people who snack sometimes tend to have 
much higher average weights than those who snack frequently or always. 
Logistic Regression Model for Obesity Prediction 
Question : To understand which factors (BMI, lifestyle habits, etc.) are most important in 
predicting a person’s obesity level. 
Objective 
The purpose of this analysis is to understand which factors, such as height, weight, BMI, and 
lifestyle habits, are most important in predicting whether a person is obese. 
We used a logistic regression model to classify each individual as either: 
● Obese (Obesity class I, II, III), or 
● Non-Obese (Insufficient weight, Normal, Overweight I/II). 
How to Interpret Coefficients 
● Positive coefficient :  increases the probability of being in that obesity group 
● Negative coefficient : decreases the probability 
● Coefficient near zero :  little or no influence 
8 
Obesity Analysis Using Lifestyle and Physical Condition Factors 
Rekha, Reshma Vangala, Kavya | Statistics for Data Science | November 2025  
●   Large absolute value : strong impact 
Observation: 
1. BMI is the strongest predictor 
● BMI has the largest positive coefficient, meaning people with a higher BMI are far 
more likely to be classified as obese. 
● This strongly affects the model’s performance because obesity categories themselves 
are based on BMI. 
● The model becomes extremely accurate when BMI is included. 
2. Lifestyle factors have much smaller effects 
● Variables like water intake, screen time, meals per day, and exercise habits have 
coefficients close to zero. 
● This means they contribute very little to predicting obesity in our dataset. 
3. Some lifestyle factors still show patterns 
● High-calorie food frequency slightly increases the chance of obesity. 
● Smoking also has a small positive effect. 
● Tracking calories has the strongest negative coefficient — people who track their food 
are less likely to be obese. 
These effects are small compared to BMI. 
Model Accuracy Summary:  
To understand how each feature affects obesity prediction, we tested three different logistic 
regression models: 
Model 1 (With BMI): - Accuracy was 99.5% – the highest. - BMI is the best predictor of obesity. 
9 
Obesity Analysis Using Lifestyle and Physical Condition Factors 
Rekha, Reshma Vangala, Kavya | Statistics for Data Science | November 2025  
Model 2 (Without BMI): - Accuracy dropped to 68.3%. - Lifestyle habits alone don’t predict obesity very well. 
Model 3 (With Weight Only): - Accuracy improved to 88% when weight was added (but no BMI). - Weight is a strong predictor, but still not as strong as BMI. 
Key Findings 
1. Gender Differences in Weight 
Males weigh significantly more than females, confirmed by the t-test and supported by the 
boxplot. 
2. Gender and Obesity Level Are Connected 
The Chi-square test shows a clear association between gender and obesity level. Obesity 
categories differ meaningfully between males and females. 
3. Family History Strongly Affects Weight 
People with a family history of being overweight   tend to weigh much more. This was confirmed 
by both statistical results and visual graphs. 
4. Exercise Frequency Influences Obesity 
Non-obese individuals exercise more often compared to obese individuals. Exercise frequency 
shows a strong link with obesity status. 
5. Snacking Habits Impact Weight 
Weight varies significantly across snacking groups. Those who snack “Sometimes” have the 
highest average weight. Post-hoc tests show meaningful differences between several snacking 
habits. 
6. BMI Is the Best Predictor of Obesity 
Logistic regression results show: 
● With BMI: 99.5% accuracy 
● Without BMI: Accuracy drops to 68.3% 
● With Weight Only: Accuracy = 88% 
BMI explains obesity far better than any lifestyle factor. 
7. Lifestyle Factors Have Small Predictive Power 
Habits such as water intake, smoking, exercise, and calorie tracking have very small effects 
individually compared to BMI. 
10
